---
layout: bible-commentary
---


## 2 Corinthians

3:6: **буква убивает**. Закон, если благодать не присутствует, порождает лицемеров и существует только в букве. Поэтому апостол утверждает: Буква убивает, а дух животворит (2 Кор. 3:6). Так пусть дух сопутствует букве, чтобы буква не убивала того, кого не животворит дух; но чтобы мы исполняли постановления Закона не нашими силами, но по дару Спасителя. (Блж. Августин)

9:8: Nowhere is it more magnificently summarized than in this very epistle, 2 Corinthians. Go back to chapter 9 for a moment and verse 8. This is the greatest statement on the sufficiency of grace made anywhere in the Scripture. Notice its comprehensiveness. Second Corinthians 9:8, “And God is able” – that is he is powerful enough; he is capable – “to make all grace abound to you, that always having all sufficiency in everything, you may have an abundance for every good deed.”
The superlatives here are almost overwhelming: all grace, all sufficiency, in all things, all ways, and an abundance for all or every good deed. God has the ability to pour out enough grace so that it literally overflows you and always you will have all sufficiency for all the issues of life and an abundance of grace for every good deed. You have all the grace available you need to believe. You have all the grace you need to remove your sin and apply the righteousness of Christ to you. You have all the necessary grace to understand the Word. You have all the necessary grace granted to you to apply the Word, to overcome temptation, to triumph over habitual sin. You have all the grace necessary to endure suffering and disappointment and pain and sorrow. You have all the grace necessary to obey the Lord, all the grace required to serve Him effectively and powerfully, all the grace necessary to worship Him in truth and in spirit.
(MacArthur)

9:8: Some would suggest that when you get to the deep things, you have to turn away from the Scripture, because the Scripture’s only good for the light touch. If you want the deep things to be dealt with, you’ve got to turn to psychology and psychiatry and therapy and counseling and even medication. You have to fill in the lack in our Christian life with some human insight or human wisdom. Sad to say, as bizarre as that sounds, most churches have bought into that.
Most evangelical churches have bought into the idea that the serious problems that Christians have are beyond the realm of the spiritual; they’re beyond the realm of the power of God. They’re beyond grace; they’re beyond divine grace, and they require human technique – human technique, for the large part, invented and defined and basically altered over the last 120 years. Psychology is offered as the source of power in solving the deep problems while divine grace is adequate only for the shallower ones. You have to turn to some human source for the deep things, and you can turn to God for the shallow ones.
Now, that may be the worst of it. On the other hand, the best of it might be churches that believe only shallow things can be dealt with by divine grace, deep things need human wisdom. How strange is that?
Is the Word of God so insufficient? Which Word is perfect, totally transforming the whole person, according to Psalm 19. Is the wisdom from above which confounds all the wisdom of man and calls it foolishness so insufficient to call upon that foolishness to help it? Is the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we are complete, in whom we have all things that pertain to life and godliness and have become partakers of His own divine nature and possessors of all his fullness, so insufficient that He can’t provide what we need? Is the Holy Spirit who has filled us with might in the inner man and given us all the fullness of God so we can do exceeding abundantly above all we can ask or think so weak and insufficient as not to be able to help us cope? It’s unthinkable. Is the package of spiritual resources we have received in salvation, which enables us to do everything in which we are strengthened unto all things in Christ, unable at any point in our lives?
And what does human wisdom add to us? When Paul said, “our sufficiency is from God,” was that just ignorance? Was he wrong? Was that foolishness?
What a tragic delusion in the world, but what an infinitely more tragic delusion in the church.
(MacArthur)

12:7: “**There was given me**” – and I told you it was given to him by God. And I remind you that most people want to wander through life thinking that God brings all the good times, and the Devil brings all the bad times and don’t understand that the bad times come at the will of God just like the good times. And the bad times are by God’s design and far more productive than the good times. (MacArthur)

12:7: Literally the word “**thorn**” is a stake. He was impaled by this thing; it was just rammed through him, impaling him. And what was it? He defines this thorn in his flesh “a **messenger of satan**.” That’s another word for a demon, an aggelos of satan, satan’s angel, a demon. (MacArthur)

12:7: The word “**buffet**” meaning to punch. This thing was hammering on me. And God had brought this. (MacArthur)

12:7: Paul had not only had a trip to heaven, but he had a revelation of Christ on the Damascus Road, and he had a further revelation of Christ when He came to him when he was in jail in the land of Israel. He had a further revelation that God gave him when an angel joined him on a ship. The Holy Spirit came to him and testified to him about chains and imprisonment. I mean there was just this constant flow. We’re not talking about the 13 epistles that he received by inspiration; we’re talking about direct contact with heaven. And that’s enough to make the best of men **proud**. It’s a little intimidating. And you can imagine there’s a little dialogue about missionary strategy. And Silas is there, and maybe Timothy’s there. And there's a disagreement. And Paul might say: “How many times have you fellows been to heaven? None, good. We’ll do my plan.” I mean, you know, just the humblest of men would be exalted with that kind of experience. (MacArthur)

12:7: Let me tell you something, folks, God blesses us. But while you’re in there praying for blessing and blessing and blessing and blessing, you’d better realize that the more you’re blessed, the more likely you are to need to be – what? – humbled. So, the backside of all this blessing you may be pleading for may be painful. So, God uses suffering to humble us. And listen, folks, if need be, he’ll use Satan to do it. But as I look at my own life and I see God’s blessing on my life, I just always walk in anticipation of a disaster. And I do? I’m never surprised. I’m – you know what? I’m almost relieved when it happens, because then it’ll get over. You know, the Lord blesses and blesses, and he blesses the teaching of the Word, and he blesses the Church, and he blesses the ministry. And you know that somewhere down the road your flesh is going to say, “Look at all the success, look at all this blessing.” And the Lord is going to have to send a messenger from Satan to drive a stake through your otherwise proud flesh. Right? So, you expect, and it comes, and it’s necessary.Trouble does reveal our spiritual character, and trouble does humble us. When the best and most beloved of our accomplishments start to fall apart, and we can’t do anything about it, that’s very humbling, and it’s painful, but it’s purposeful. (MacArthur)

12:7: It’s notable he didn’t start messing with the demon. He didn’t *bind* Satan, or try to cast that demon out, in the name of Christ. He just went to God. Directly to God who controls men and demons. (MacArthur)

12:9: **grace** is a magnificent Greek word used 155 times in the New Testament. Now, the word in the Greek is *charis*, and it basically means a favor bestowed. It means a generous gift given. That is its sort of normal, common meaning. But in the sense of the New Testament, in its redemptive sense, it means a favor bestowed and a generous given – a generous gift given by God to people who are totally undeserving and unworthy. It is God’s favor, God’s goodness, God’s generosity to provide for those who are unworthy of that provision. It starts at salvation, and it goes right on forever, because it tells us in Ephesians that through the ages to come, God will show the riches of His kindness in his grace toward us. 
This grace is a dynamic force. It is a dynamic force by which God applies to us everything we need to save us, to keep us, to enable us, to deliver us, to sanctify us, to glorify us. We were saved by grace, Ephesians 2 says, through faith, but it is God’s grace that just initiates their sustains all the way through all of eternity. Every benefit in life, every benefit in eternity is by God’s grace.
And this great redemptive aspect of grace comes only to those who know Jesus Christ. It is faith in Jesus Christ that brings us into God’s "uncommon" grace, into God’s special saving grace and eternal grace.
No word more clearly sums up the message of our faith in grace, and no word sets us apart from all other religions of the world than grace, for all others have inherently in them some attainment of salvation through some human achievement, religious or moral, or a combination of both.
But ours is a grace religion. Ours is a faith that includes the concept – the overriding concept that we deserve nothing, and yet God gives us everything. Because of his goodness, he bestows on us eternally favors undeserved.
See also: note on 2 Cor 9:8.
(MacArthur)
