---
title: John MacArthur — Perseverance of the saints (sermon)
---

The doctrine of perseverance of the saints.
The Westminster Confession accurately affirms that saving faith cannot fail. Let's see what this perseverance in faith means and what it doesn't.

First of all, it does not mean that Christians don’t ever fail. We do. What it does mean is what the Confession says it means: They do not completely nor finally fail.
We fail? Fail, yes. Fail severely, yes. Fail repeatedly, yes. Fail completely, no. Fail finally, no.

So to speak of the security of the believer is not in itself wrong. It is not true if we say that someone is secure no matter how much they live in sin, no matter how much they turn against Christ and even flatly deny him, as many have said. Security is simply a reality because of perseverance. A believer may sin, but he will not abandon himself to sin. He will not come again under the utter domination of sin. He will not lose faith in Christ, and he will not deny his Lord and the gospel.

No true believer will shun holiness and embrace sin all together.
See how 1 John 3:9-10 puts it, very simple. “No one who is born of God practices sin. By this the children of God and the children of the devil are obvious: anyone who does not practice righteousness is not of God.” It’s that simple. The doctrine of the believer’s security is tied to the believer’s persevering faith.

Peter is this great example of the high and the low, the extreme high and the extreme low.  Peter is proof that a true believer can stumble, and stumble seriously, and fail, and fail seriously, and be weak, and cowardly, and make temporary denials, but because he has been given protection by an enduring faith produced in his heart by the sovereign work of God, he never fails completely and he never fails finally.

Well, our dear Peter, he understood the keeping power of God.  I’ll tell you what, if Peter could have lost his salvation, he would have.  How close can you get to Satan so that the Lord looks at you and says, “Get thee behind me, Satan?”  You can’t get any closer than to be espousing Satan’s desires.  But did Peter ever rebound from that.  Look at John 21.  After all those denials, and they were on three occasions.  If you multiply all of them, he did it six times on three occasions.  But when you come to John 21, Jesus finally confronts Peter.

Just to give you a quick background, Jesus after his resurrection met with the apostles, Jesus said to the disciples, “Go to Galilee and wait for me there.”  Well, they went.  When he finally comes – 21:1 - the disciples are at the Sea of Tiberias and there they were, Simon Peter - always named first every time because he’s the leader - and Thomas and Nathanael, and James and John the sons of Zebedee and two others, probably Peter and Andrew.  They had the fishing background.

And Simon said to them, “I’m going fishing.”  And the Greek language here has a certain finality about it.  He says, “I’m going to go back to fishing.”  And what he was going to do was go back to his old career.  And, of course, they went out, got into the boat and couldn’t catch anything.  Why?  Because the Lord rerouted all the fish.  They knew that lake like the back of their hands, they grew up fishing there, they knew exactly what time of day, and what season of the year to find fish in what spot.

And Jesus showed up and asked the question that you never want to ask somebody who’s fished all night and caught nothing, “You don’t have any fish, do you?”  They said, “No.”  And then He said this ridiculous thing, “Cast the net on the right hand side of the boat and you’ll find a catch.”  That’s very insulting.  What do you think, we fished one side?  Or maybe you think the boat stays in one spot?  Or maybe you think the fish know the right from the left?  What kind of a statement is that?

But always Jesus spoke with authority, so they did what he said.  And they got so many fish they couldn’t handle them.  And then that disciple therefore whom Jesus loved - that’s John -  said to Peter, “Huh, it’s the Lord.”  And Peter, bless his heart, did he have enduring faith?  Sure.  Was it weak?  Yes.  Did he fail?  Yes.  But, oh my, did he rebound.

They came in and the Lord had prepared breakfast.  You know how the Lord prepares breakfast, don’t you?  Breakfast.  And they brought in some of their fish, 153 fish, verse 11 says.  “Jesus said, ‘Come and have breakfast.’  And nobody said, ‘Who are you?’  They knew.  And after breakfast - ” in verse 15 “ - Jesus said to Simon Peter, ‘Simon, do you love me more than these?’ ”  What a provocative, penetrating question.  Do you love me more than these fish, these nets, this way of life?  Do you love me more than these other disciples?  You said that if everybody forsook you, you never would.  You said you were willing to go to death with me.  You didn’t, you denied Me.

And I guess the right question is, “ ‘Simon, son of John, or Jonas, do you love me?’  And he said to him, ‘Yes, Lord, You know that I love you.’  And he said, “Then teach my lambs,’ ” “Then do what I tell you, I called you to preach and to teach, not to fish.”  And remember, Peter had denied Him three times, so the Lord was going to restore him three times.

“He said to him a second time, ‘Simon, son of John, do you love me?’  And he said, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.  You know that.’  And he said, ‘Then shepherd my sheep,’ ”  Do what I told you to do.  “And he said to him a third time, ‘Simon, son of John, do You love me?’  Peter was grieved this time, - ” this hurt.  “He was grieved because he said to Him the third time ‘Do you love me?’  And he said to Him this, ‘Lord, you know all things.  You know that I love you.’ ”

Why?  Because God himself had given to Peter an enduring faith, an enduring love for Christ.  Weak?  Yes.  Vacillating?  Yes.  Stumbling?  Yes.  But never completely, and never finally, and always the first to be eager to be restored.  And Jesus said, “That’s all I ask.  Tend my sheep.  You’re the shepherd I’m looking for.”  “When you were young - ” verse 18 “ - you used to gird yourself, walk where you wanted, now you’re old, you’ll stretch your hands out - ” He was speaking of Peter’s crucifixion, which is how he finally died “ - someone else is going to tie you up, bring you where you don’t want to go.’  And this he said signifying by what death he would glorify God.”   Peter, you’re going to be a martyr.  And Peter was faithful to the end, and when it came time to be crucified, he wouldn’t let them crucify him the normal way, because he wasn’t worthy, he said, to be crucified like his Lord, so they flipped him over and crucified him upside down, a more excruciating way to die.  He endured to the end.

There isn’t anybody better, really, to write about the perseverance of the saints, about an enduring faith, about an enduring love, about remaining faithful to the end.  There’s nobody better to write that than Peter, the man who repented with tears, the man who was so pained by his own failure that he dove into the water to swim as fast as he could to Jesus, the one who was so confident of his own genuine love and faith that he asked the Lord to read his heart, knowing that what he saw there He would know is the real thing.  And so it’s appropriate that Peter tell us about persevering faith.
