---
title: How to make decisions about things not taught about in the Bible?
---

how do I make decisions about the things which are not clearly talked about in the Bible? some people dressed like that all those listen to some sort of misic. Some people watch TV and some doesn't. Some people work on Sunday, some people do not even have fun on Sunday. I will share some things that I personally use.
Number one. Expedience. 1 Cor 6:12: all things which are not prohibited are local to me, but are not always beneficial spiritually. So I ask myself the question that Paul is posing right here.  Will my doing this enhance my spiritual life?  Will it cultivate godliness?  That’s a fair question.  That’s a basic question.  Will it cultivate godliness?  Will it be profitable to me?  Will it be to my advantage?  Will it profit me?
In other words, I’m not looking at life from the standpoint of, boy, can I do this and get away with it?  I’m looking at life, can I do this and have it increase my godliness?  Will it be spiritually profitable?

2. it slow me down in the race? I’m running, as 1 Corinthians 9 says, if I’m running to win the prize, if I’m running to obtain, then I have to ask myself if this will slow me down.  Notice Hebrews 12:1.  We are in a race, the race of faith.  We have seen in chapter 11 a host of people who lived by faith and they are living witnesses of the validity of living by faith.  They are the cloud of witnesses who tell us to live by faith. Lay down every weight, the bible says (where?)
Now what is “every weight?”  The word is onkos.  It simply means “bulk.”  Bulk.  It isn’t sin.  It’s just needless bulk, something that weighs us down, diverts our priorities, takes our attention, sucks our energy, dampens our enthusiasm for the things of God.
let’s assume that he trained perfectly, that he did everything he was supposed to do in the process of preparation, he was in top physical shape, everything was as it ought to be in his training, his moral life was clean, he didn’t dissipate his body, but he came in and decided to compete in combat boots and a wool overcoat.  That wouldn’t be sinful, but it would be pretty stupid.  That would be unnecessary bulk. We lay them aside only because they slow us down.
There’s lots of forms of bulk:  Legalism, ceremonialism, needless waste of time that sucks your energy and fouls up your priorities.  So you ask yourself a simple question, will it slow me down in the spiritual race?  Anything that impinges upon my effectiveness in serving Christ, I won’t do that.

Number five.  This is a very practical one.  Will it, number five, will it hypocritically cover my sin?  Will it hypocritically cover my sin? are you using your freedom to excuse this sin you actually want to participate in? Peter says, don't use your freedom as a cloak to cover your evil.? Where. Luke at your motives.

Number six.  Now this is a very important one.  Will it violate the lordship of Christ in my life?  Will it violate the lordship of Christ in my life?  And for this one I need you to turn to Romans chapter 14.  We spent a long time there, but this will refresh you, I think, briefly.  Will it violate the lordship of Christ in my life?

Now listen to this basic thought, all right?  Grab this one.  Every Christian should live in submission to the lordship of Christ.  Everybody agree on that?  All of us are to live in submission to the lordship of Christ, true?  Do you understand that?  Then do you understand this second point, that not all of us agree 100 percent on what the Lord would have us to do?  Is that right?  Some people think the Lord says no to this, and other people think the Lord says that’s okay.  Some people think the Lord says it’s a sin to do this, some people think it’s okay.

Now listen, not all of us, we would know the explicit things in Scripture, sure, but not all of us agree the same about what the Lord would have us do.  Some people think the Lord wants you to read your Bible every morning of your life and if you don’t, you’ve sinned against God.  Some people really believe that.  Some people believe if you don’t go to Sunday morning, Sunday night church and Wednesday night prayer meeting, you’ve slipped spiritually.  Other people are not bound in their conscience to do that.  They can go Sunday morning, they can go Sunday night.  Whether they go Wednesday night may be a matter of convenience.  There are some people who want to read the Word as often as they can, but they’re not bound in their conscience to read it every morning of their entire life.

There are people, you see, who sense the lordship of Christ in different ways.

In other words, whatever may be the restrictions in a Christian’s life, he does them because he believes that’s what the Lord wants.  You got that?  He believes that’s what the Lord wants.  Now listen to me.  As long as you believe that, then do it or don’t do it.  And ask yourself the question, is this something I believe the Lord would want?  Is this something I believe the Lord would not want?  And that’s a matter of - what?  - conscience.  You say, “Well, what if your conscience is wrong?”  Don’t violate your conscience.  You’ll never know if your conscience is wrong because if your conscience tells you that, it’s because you think it’s right.

If you violate your conscience, you’re going to train yourself to do a very bad thing because as your mind grows to understand better what is right, when your conscience, then, tells you if you’ve trained yourself to violate your conscience, your conscience isn’t going to do you any good.  So don’t train yourself to violate your conscience.  And that’s exactly what he’s saying.  You ask yourself the question, will this violate my understanding of the lordship of Christ?

Some brother might come to you - and this happens all the time - and say, “You can do that.  Go ahead, you can do that.  You’re free.  You’re free.  You’re free.  Why you can do that, that’s not wrong.  That’s perfectly all right.”  If it violates your conscience - what? - don’t do it.  Don’t train yourself to ignore conscience.  Paul says, “I never do anything against my conscience.  I don’t want to sear my conscience with scar tissue so it’s insensitive.”  The person who keeps the sabbath, if a person wants to sit on a couch and that’s his way to keep the sabbath, don’t bug him about that.  Don’t reprimand him about that.  Don’t push him.
God doesn’t want any man to violate his conscience.  So we don’t want to do things that are going to lead people to ignore the lordship of Christ which they perceive coming through their conscience.  Let’s call that the principle of encroachment.  That means you’re encroaching on the sovereignty of Christ in the life.

If I choose to do something - let me sum that one up - if I choose to do something, it must fit within what I believe is the will of Christ my Lord, right?  I don’t want to violate that.  I don’t want to violate that.  To violate that in my mind would be to take the control of my life, wouldn’t it?  To usurp the lordship of Christ.  I don’t want to do that.  That’s encroaching.

Number seven.  This is basic.  Will it help other Christians by its example? Will it put a stumbling block in front of others? Will my freedom destroy with the faith of someone whose conscience is weaker? Will it lead others to Christ? Is MyLife not interfering with evangelism?
Is it consistent with christlikeness? In other words, would Jesus do it?
(MacArthur)
